Configurable and composable storage (#40)
FuelLabs/sway-rfcs: rfcs/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage.md

- clear abstractions for storable types via `Storage` trait, as well as storage primitives for storing arbitrary Sway types, even the dynamic ones.
  - The abstractions will forbid semantically wrong usage by-design.
- support for safe and arbitrary composable and configurable dynamic storage types.
  - Implementing the `Storage` trait will automatically make a storage type compatible with all other storage types.
- support for complex configuration of dynamic storage types in `storage` declarations.
- support for skipping default configuration of elements in `storage` declarations.

## Sample code

[sample-code]: #sample-code

To prove that such implementation is possible and to give a tangible feeling for the proposed new approach to storage handling, this RFC comes with extensive [sample code](../files/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage/):
- [sway-libs](../files/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage/sway-libs/) provide:
  - definition of the `Storage` trait as well as few other traits like, e.g., `DeepReadStorage` and `DeepClearStorage`.
  - implementation of the atomic `Storage` types, `StorageBox` and `StorageEncodedBox`.

>   - implementation of STD dynamic storage types like, e.g., `StorageVec` and `StorageMap`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - implementation of standard library dynamic storage types like, e.g., `StorageVec` and `StorageMap`.
```

This guide-level explanation primarily explains how the new `storage` declaration and `Storage` types will be used by Sway programmers. Explaining writing user-defined `Storage` types was more fitting to the [Reference-level explanation](#reference-level-explanation) and is explained there.

## `storage` declarations and storage types

[storage-declarations-and-storage-types]: #storage-declarations-and-storage-types

The `storage` declaration will get a new operator, `:=`, pronounced _configured with_. The left-hand side (LHS) of the `:=` operator will be the definition of the storage element, as it is now. The right-hand side (RHS) will represent the _configuration_ of that storage element. The configuration is any const eval expression that returns an instance of a type stored by the storage type specified on the LHS.

The type of the LHS storage element must implement the `Storage` trait. This trait denotes a storage type that can be an element of a `storage` declaration. The `Storage` trait is explained in detail in the [The `Storage` trait](#the-storage-trait) chapter of the [Reference-level explanation](#reference-level-explanation).

> There are two classes of storage types. _Atomic storage types_ are the leafs of hierarchies of composed storage types. They cannot contain other storage types. _Compound storage types_ are storage types that contain other storage types. Standard library (STD) provides two _atomic storage types_, the [`StorageBox`](../files/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage/sway-libs/storage/storage_box.sw) and the [`StorageEncodedBox`](../files/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage/sway-libs/storage/storage_encoded_box.sw), as well as several compound storage types, like e.g., [`StorageVec`](../files/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage/sway-libs/storage/storage_vec.sw) and [`StorageMap`](../files/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage/sway-libs/storage/storage_map.sw).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two classes of storage types. _Atomic storage types_ are the leafs of hierarchies of composed storage types. They cannot contain other storage types. _Compound storage types_ are storage types that contain other storage types. The standard library provides two _atomic storage types_, the [`StorageBox`](../files/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage/sway-libs/storage/storage_box.sw) and the [`StorageEncodedBox`](../files/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage/sway-libs/storage/storage_encoded_box.sw), as well as several compound storage types, like e.g., [`StorageVec`](../files/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage/sway-libs/storage/storage_vec.sw) and [`StorageMap`](../files/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage/sway-libs/storage/storage_map.sw).
```

        (Struct { x: 0, y: true }, [1, 2, 3]),
        (Struct::default(), []),
        (Struct { x: 11, y: false }, [111, 222, 333]),
    ],

    map_of_pairs: StorageMap<str[3], StoragePair<StorageBox<Struct>, StVecOfU64>> := [
        ("abc", (Struct { x: 0, y: true }, [1, 2, 3])),
        ("def", Struct::default(), []),
        ("ghi", Struct { x: 11, y: false }, [111, 222, 333]),
    ],

    pair_of_pairs: StoragePair<StPairOfStVecOfU64, StPairOfStVecOfU64> := (
        ([1, 2, 3], [11, 22, 33]),
        ([4, 5, 6], [44, 55, 66])
    )
}
```

For more examples of using storage types in storage declarations, see:
- [`demo_contract_basic_storage.sw`](../files/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage/contracts/demo_contract_basic_storage.sw)
- [`demo_contract_encoded_storage.sw`](../files/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage/contracts/demo_contract_encoded_storage.sw).
- [`demo_contract_user_defined_storage.sw`](../files/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage/contracts/demo_contract_user_defined_storage.sw).

## Default `storage` configuration

[default-storage-configuration]: #default-storage-configuration

> If developers just want to list the `storage` elements, knowing that they will be configured via SDKs, they can list the elements without providing the _configure with_ operator. The types of the values used to configure the elements must implement the `core::default::Default` trait that will be added to the STD.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If developers just want to list the `storage` elements, knowing that they will be configured via SDKs, they can list the elements without providing the _configure with_ operator. The types of the values used to configure the elements must implement the `core::default::Default` trait that will be added to the standard library.
```

1. Thus, the failing of `try_` methods can always be seen as a semantic failure. E.g., `StorageVec::try_get()` can fail if the `StorageVec` is not initialized or because it requested element index is out of bounds. Since in the first case we consider the vector to be empty, it is also a semantic error.
1. Certain operations might have a version with a "special behavior". E.g., in the case of the `StorageVec`, we want to provide a possibility to `get()` an element without the expensive length check. In such cases, the method will be named by the original name, and the suffix indicating the "special behavior". E.g., `StorageVec::get_unchecked()`.
1. When the special behavior consists of doing deep clear via `DeepClearStorage` or deep read via `DeepReadStorage`, the suffix will always be `_deep_clear` and `_deep_read`, respectively.

Thus, every storage type operation might come in all or some of these flavours:
- `fn <operation>() -> T`: reverts in case of uninitialized storage or other error.
- `fn try_<operation>() -> Option<T>`
- `fn <operation>_<special_behavior>() -> T`: reverts in case of uninitialized storage or other error.

> - `fn try_<operation>_<special_behavior>() -> Option<T>`

Reviewer: We discussed changing the naming in the API previously here: https://github.com/FuelLabs/sway/issues/4740

I think we should go with the opposite of what's said in this paragraph.

Most of the time, you want an operation to return `Option`. I'd much rather we standardize on `read`+`read_unchecked` than `try_read` + `read`. Reverts should be the exception not the rule and it should be clear when an operation potentially reverts.

Author: # TL; DR

The proposal (for the next discussion round :smile:) is:
- `fn <operation>() -> Option<T>`: `None` in case of uninitialized storage or other, semantic, error.
- `fn <operation>_or_revert() -> T`
- `fn <operation>_<special_behavior>() -> Option<T>`: `None` in case of uninitialized storage or other, semantic, error.
- `fn <operation>_<special_behavior>_or_revert() -> T`
- `fn <operation>() -> T`: operation never fails.
- `fn <operation>_<special_behavior>() -> T`: operation with special behavior never fails.

Looking at the storage types we have, there will never be an explosion of those variants per operation, and we still have a clear guidelines that capture the overall complexity (explained below).

# Detailed Analysis

After spending a good portion of the last week walking in circles and pondering how to capture the complexity of the storage access semantics into consistent API guidelines, here I am again, doing the same :smile:

I am completely fine with promoting the `Option` returning operations to be the default ones.

But we still need to capture the overall matrix of possible combinations. Since [FuelLabs/sway/#4740](https://github.com/FuelLabs/sway/issues/4740) is not going into details there, let's do it here.

Before starting, just to emphasise the difference, the term "unchecked" in the #4740 and in the RFC paragraph, means two different things. In the #4740 it is a synonim for unwrap while in the RFC it represents a "special behavior". In the concrete example, running the `StorageVec::get()` without checking the vector length and out-of-bounds access.

To the matrix of possible combinations and what we want to capture in the API.

Every operation can potentially:
- fail if the storage is not initialized. E.g., `StorageBox::read()` on uninitialized `StorageBox`.
- fail because of a semantically wrong usage. E.g., out of bounds `StorageVec::get()` on initialized `StorageVec`.
- have one or more "special behaviors" that affect what the operation do. E.g., `StorageVec::get()` without lenght checks. E.g., `StorageVec::pop()` with deep clear.
  - we expect a small number of special behaviors per operation, very often none or mostly one.
  - special behaviors might require additional trait constraints. E.g. `DeepClearStorage`.
  - special behavior operations can also fail because of the first two points.
- have none of the above; neither it can fail nor it has any special behaviors. E.g., `StorageMap::get()`.

The guidelines should reflect the above matrix.

What RFC proposes, to simplify the matrix and the API, and assuming that we are not losing any valuable information there, is to treat the access to the uninitialized storage as a semantically wrong usage and not as a special technical error.

Means, every storage type assigns a meaningful default semantics to the uninitialized state. E.g, an uninitialized `StorageVec` behaves the same as an empty `StorageVec`. For all the storage types we currently support, this is possible in an intuitive way.

It also has a benefit of just creating an instance with `new()` without the need for initialization. `StorageVec::new()` behaves the same as `StorageVec::init([])` but does not produce any storage writes until used. For storage types I've played with and the sample `StoragePair` having this meaningful default behavior was always possible.

If we do not join those two points and consistently want to distinguish between the failing because of the storage being uninitialized and because of a semantically wrong usage, we will necessarily end up in the cumbersome API like, e.g., `StorageVec::get()` returning `Option<Option<T>>` where the first option means failure on uninitialized and the second out-of-bounds. I doubt that developers will ever want to distinguish those two cases.

One more thing to consider in the guidelines is:
> it should be clear when an operation potentially reverts

How to achieve this via naming convention only? (We are talking here about the computational effects. We had this discussion internally triggered by the `#[storage]` attributes not being a part of the function type.)

One possibility would be:
- `<operation>() -> Option<T>`: does not revert.
- `<operation>_<unchecked or some better name>() -> T`: potentially reverts.
- `<operation>() -> T`: does not revert. E.g., `StorageMap::get() -> T`.

And all this should also be aplicable to "special behavior" variants.

Using the term "unchecked" as a suffix I see as misleading. Because, in the case of, e.g., `StorageBox::read_unchecked()` it actually _does check_ and it _will revert if that check fails_.

"unchecked" as a word implies that we are actually skipping checks and who knows what can happen. Developers responsibility. E.g., in the RFC, the `StorageVec::get_unchecked()` cannot fail because it literally _does not check_ the bounds and returns the calculated element. Accessing that element later on can fail, but the `get_unchecked()` itself cannot.

I am arguing here to adopt some other terminology for the `<operation>_<give me the result or revert if it is not there>()`, and not not to have that variant.

Perhaps `<operation>_or_revert()`?

To wrap it up, the proposal (for the next discussion round :smile:) is:
- `fn <operation>() -> Option<T>`: `None` in case of uninitialized storage or other, semantic, error.
- `fn <operation>_or_revert() -> T`
- `fn <operation>_<special_behavior>() -> Option<T>`: `None` in case of uninitialized storage or other, semantic, error.
- `fn <operation>_<special_behavior>_or_revert() -> T`
- `fn <operation>() -> T`: operation never fails.
- `fn <operation>_<special_behavior>() -> T`: operation with special behavior never fails.

Looking at the storage types we have, there will never be an explosion of those variants per operation, and we still have a clear guidelines that capture the overall complexity.

Author: A question that immediately comes to my mind is why `_or_revert()/unchecked()` at all, when we can simply call `unwrap()`?

The `<operation>() <-> try_<operation>()` pairs are there from the beginning if that's a valid reason. `<operation>().unwrap()` results in a potentially much bigger code then `<operation>_or_revert()` (see [FuelLabs/sway/#5982](https://github.com/FuelLabs/sway/issues/5982)), but this should be handled in optimizations.

Also, other APIs, aside from the storage API, does not have such pairs. E.g. `Vec` has only `get() -> Option<T>`.

So why to have `_or_revert()/unchecked()` so prominently in the storage API?

Storage reference will be supported in the `storage` declarations, by allowing the `storage` keyword to be used on the RHS of the _configure with_ operator:

```Sway
type StVecOfU64 = StorageVec<StorageBox<u64>>;
type StPairOfStVecOfU64 = StoragePair<StVecOfU64, StVecOfU64>;

storage {
    vec_1: StVecOfU64 := [11, 22, 33],
    vec_2: StVecOfU64 := [44, 55, 66],

    pair_1: StPairOfStVecOfU64 := ([0, 0, 0], [1, 1, 1]),
    pair_2: StPairOfStVecOfU64 := ([], []),

    map_1: StorageMap<str[3], StVecOfU64> := [
        ("abc", [1, 2, 3]),
        ("def", [11, 22, 33]),
        ("ghi", [111, 222, 333]),
    ]

    //--
    // Storage references can be used in storage configurations.
    // They can reference other storage elements, or their parts.
    //--
    vec_of_refs: StorageVec<StorageRefBox<StVecOfU64>> := [
        StorageRef::Null,
        storage.vec_1.as_ref(), // <<-- Note using the `storage` keyword here, as well as `as_ref`.
        storage.pair_1.first().as_ref(),
        storage.map_1.get("abc").as_ref(),
        StorageRef::Ref(some_const_fn_that_returns_the_storage_key_of_the_referenced_storage()),
    ],
}
```

> For more examples on using storage references, see the [`demo_contract_storage_references.sw`](../files/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage/contracts/demo_contract_storage_references.sw).

Reviewer: I think `StorageRef` is an unnecessary complication.

I don't see what this adds over `Option<StorageKey>` which would already be supported. If anything it is worse because it reintroduces a potential implicit null.

Unless there's a compelling reason to have a special type, I say we should remove this and recommend storing `StorageKey`s and `Option<StorageKey>`s for references to other parts of the storage.

Author: Removing the enum and the `Null` and using `Option` instead I like a lot!

Actually, the first version of the `StorageRef` was a struct type-safely wrapping the `StorageKey` but then I ended up thinking how to support not having a reference and introduced `Null` motivated by the similar programming language concept. The result was putting the burden of checking for `Null` when dereferencing _always_, even in the situations where the reference will always be there. Using `Option<StorageRef>` where the `StorageRef` is a struct is definitely the right way!

To the question of having the dedicated `StorageRef`, or using the general `StorageKey` directly, the benefit of having the `struct StorageRef<TStorage>` is there, because of these two reasons:
1. Type-safety.
1. Having easy-to-use, zero-(additional)-cost abstraction that clearly communicates the intent and provides a standardized usage pattern.

Ad 1) `StorageRef<TStorage>` referrs to a storage of a particular type and that is type-checked by the compiler. It also clearly communicates that it referrs to a storage of a particular type. Using `StorageKey` would be more like having a raw pointer into the storage.

Ad 2) Using the naked `StorageKey` will require from developers to implement their own `deref` equivalents every time they use it for referencing. Those will be cumbersome and error-prone, because they will need to use the proper way to create the proper storage type etc. In the worse case, we will end up having that code in contracts, and in the best case, having it packed in various libraries. Having the `StorageRef` provided by the standard library gives a simple type that clearly communicates the intent and gives all convenience in a standardized and zero-cost way.

## Breaking changes

[breaking-changes]: #breaking-changes

This proposal brings breaking changes in:
- `storage` declarations.

> - existing STD storage types like, e.g., `StorageVec`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- existing standard library storage types like, e.g., `StorageVec`.
```

To support explaining breaking changes to existing users and to ease migration we will:
- utilize [expressive diagnostics](./0012-expressive-diagnostics.md) to provide detailed explanations on how to fix compiler errors and migrate the code.
- where applicable, provide scripts to semi-automate the migration by converting the existing code to the new syntax and semantics.

# Reference-level explanation

[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

The implementation of the proposed features relies on a couple of other language features that need to be implemented first. We will only list them here, since their detailed explanation, in certain cases, could require a separate RFC. To follow the reference-level explanation of the configurable and composable storage, it is sufficient to have an intuitive understanding of these language features. Where needed, they are explained in enough detail in the [sample code](../files/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage/).

> The [sample code](../files/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage/) provides a detailed view on how the Sway STD part of this RFC will be implemented and used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [sample code](../files/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage/) provides a detailed view on how the standard library part of this RFC will be implemented and used.
```

Here, we will focus on the compiler support for the feature.

The additional language features that are the prerequisite to implement this RFC are:
- const functions and traits.
- typed slices.
- marker traits.
- negative impls.
- type aliases with generic parameters and trait constraints.

## The `Storage` trait

[the-storage-trait]: #the-storage-trait

The `Storage` trait is [defined](../files/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage/sway-libs/storage.sw) as:

```Sway
pub trait Storage {
    type Value;
    type Config;

    const fn new(self_key: &StorageKey) -> Self;

>     const fn internal_get_config(self_key: &StorageKey, value: &Self::Value) -> Self::Config;

Reviewer: If we go with `StorageInit` instead of `Config`, maybe this can be `internal_make_initializer`

Author: I like the verb `make`! I didn't like `get` and was thinking about alternatives, but didn't like them, e.g. `create`, either. They all sounded very "runtimeysh". `make` somehow does not have that apeal. Here is your self key and the value to store, _make_ me the <config (good name still to find :smile:)>.

As mentioned, `initializer` can mislead and in the and, the final name behind `make` will depend on how we name the `Config` associated type.

    const fn internal_layout() -> StorageLayout;

    const fn self_key(&self) -> StorageKey;

    #[storage(write)]
    fn init(self_key: &StorageKey, value: &Self::Value) -> Self;
} {
    const fn as_ref(&self) -> StorageRef<Self> {
        StorageRef::<Self>::Ref(self.self_key())
    }
}
```

The functions prefixed with `internal` are used only when implementing storage types, and should never be used in contract code.

`Storage` trait methods and associated types provide all the information needed by the compiler to:
- support configuring arbitrary storage types in `storage` declarations.
- support type-checking arbitrary composition of storage types.

> The get a hands-on feeling for concrete implementations of the `Storage` trait and better understanding of the meaning of its methods and associated types see the [provided implementations of STD storage types](../files/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage/sway-libs/storage/) and the user-defined [`StoragePair`](../files/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage/user-defined-libs/storage_pair.sw).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The get a hands-on feeling for concrete implementations of the `Storage` trait and better understanding of the meaning of its methods and associated types see the [provided implementations of standard library storage types](../files/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage/sway-libs/storage/) and the user-defined [`StoragePair`](../files/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage/user-defined-libs/storage_pair.sw).
```

Once the `Value` is specified in the `Storage` implementation the compiler can type-check the RHS of `:=` against the `Value` expected by the LHS. It is worth noticing here that we have all the information needed, to, in a case of a type-mismatch, provide a detailed [expressive diagnostics](./0012-expressive-diagnostics.md) explaining the error.

Also, every storage type will always have the same way of configuring, defined by the `Value` type. This guarantees intuitive and consistent usage. E.g., for the `StorageVec`, developers will know that they always need to provide a slice of the values expected by the contained storage type.

The provided RHS expression that returns the type specified by `Value` must be const eval, as it is now.

In the second step, the compiler needs to calculate the concrete storage slots in which to store the _configured with_ RHS values.

This is where the `Storage::Config` associated type comes in play, together with the `const fn` function `internal_get_config()`.

Before generating the slots, the compiler already knows:

> - the `StorageKey` at which a particular `storage` element will be stored. This key is calculated based on the element name and namespace, or it is given using the `in` keyword. This storage key is, as mentioned below, called the _self key_ of the storage element.

Reviewer: The name of "self key" is an artifact of our thought process and it's littered all over this proposal, but I think we should try to come up with a better one since it's no longer involved with `self` as a keyword.

Maybe "field key"? Since it's the `StorageKey` for a given `storage` field?

Author: Well, `self_key` _is_ the best name :smile: IMO, of course.

It very precisely communicates what it is, and that's why it is introduced and consistently used in the RFC:

> An important term to establish will be the _self key_. Self key is the `StorageKey` at which an instance of a storage type is stored.

Why I see it having properties of a perfectly good name:
- In the implementations of `Storage` types, the term `self_key` immediately communicates that "this is _my_ storage key, the storage key at which _I_ am stored".
- The public `self_key()` method is equally clear. It gives a clear answer to the question "what is _your_ key?". (We need this method for, e.g., referencing or any other scenario where the knowledge of the slot location of the storage type instance is needed.)
- In the documentation and communication, being reflexive it immediately points to the storage instance we are talking about. 

Any other word that does not imply reflexive relationship (like "self", or "me") will be to broad and possibly applicable to several instances and the question "whose, of what" will not be immediately incorporated in the word.

E.g., having the `field_key` everywhere rises the question "which field? whose field?". The sentence "Field key is the `StorageKey` at which the instance of a storage type is stored" calls for explaining why the word "field". We have to keep in mind that storage type instances can be used independent of the `storage` which makes the term "field" even less understandable and hard to justify.

Also, some storage types could have clashing terminology with the word we choose. E.g., if we chose "element key", it will clash with what an element in the `StorageVec` is.

That's why I am for the name that implies reflexive relationship and see "self" as the perfect candidate. It also corresponds to what "self" is in Sway types. Something that points to, or denotes, myself.

- the const eval calculated RHS which has the type `Value`.

The `const fn internal_get_config()` takes exactly those two parameters and provides a result of type `Self::Config`. Every `Self::Config` type is a combination of `StorageConfig` types defined as:

```Sway
pub struct StorageConfig<TValue>
{
    pub storage_key: StorageKey,
    pub value: TValue,
}
```

Essentially, the `StorageConfig<TValue>` tells the compiler at which `storage_key` the `value` should be stored. This information is const calculated by every storage type.

E.g., the `StorageBox<T>` simply stores a value of the type `T` at its `self_key`. Therefore, its `Config` will be defined as `type Config = StorageConfig<T>`.

E.g., the `StorageVec<TStorage>` must be able to store the vector's length and the configuration of all the contained elements. Thus, its `Config` can be specified as `type Config = (StorageConfig<u64>, [TStorage::Config])`. The first part of the tuple is the length, and the second the slice of all the `Config`s of the contained storage type.

In general, the `Config` type is defined recursively as:

```
<Config> := StorageConfig<TValue>
            | [<Config>]
            | (<Config>, ...);

> ```

Reviewer: The mechanism is sound, but we need better naming than "config". It should be clearer that `StorageConfig` represents a single address initializer for consecutive slots and that `Config` is a whole, potentially composed, initializer.

Maybe `StorageInit` and `AddressInit`?

Author: Thanks for the proposal! I am not happy with the term `Config` either. While the `Value` as the name of the associated type is intuitive, `Config` does not carry such clarity.

Here we need to be cautios of the overall "initialization" vs "configuration" confusion. Since `configurable`s and `storage` are actually _configured_ in code and that configuration can be changed at deployment time, the term "configuration" is consistently used everywhere in the RFC. Sticking to that term will help to remove existing confusion, where the choice of the syntax and wording implies "initialization" and "assignment" to something that is rather a "configuration".

E.g., the `Storage::init` constructor on the other side, is an "initialization" because it will create a storge type instance at the runtime and actually stores the provided values into the storage.

To the origin of the current, non-optimal name `Config`, which I tried to change (my thinking below). Since both the associated type `Config` and the `StorageConfig` are used only by the compiler during the configuration, I've kept the name `Config` although I don't like it.

Alternative names I've played with for the `Config` associated type were:
- `ValueLayout`: because it provides the information on how the value (described by the `Value` type) is layed out in the storage. The reason I didn't choose it is, that storage types can store additional information as well, e.g., `StorageVec` its length, and not only what is in the `Value`.
- `StorageLayout`: it clashed with the `StorageLayout` enum.
- `StorageContent`: because it describes which content is stored in the storage and where exactly.

Using "Init" in the name, as explained about, can lead back to the current confusion.

Perhaps `SlotsConfig` because it provides the information on how to configure the slots, or even better `SlotsContent`?

Additional proposals are welcome :smile:

Author: Also, regardless of the terminology we chose at the end, I like the proposed formulation (but to change "initializing" to "configuring"):

> StorageConfig represents a single address initializer for consecutive slots and that Config is a whole, potentially composed, initializer

Hmmm, perhaps:

`Storage(Address)Config/Content` represents a configuration for storing a single `value/content` in consecutive slots starting at the address specified by the `storage_key`. The `SlotsConfig/Content` is a whole, potentially composed, configuration, for storing the entire value contained in the `Storage`.

Whatever the final terminology will be, it should sound well in that sentence :smile:

With the `Storage` trait defined as such, developing arbitrary storage types becomes straightforward. Every storage type is to be seen as a recursive container of other storage types, where we know that this "recursion" must end with some of the _atomic storage types_.

Thus, the implementations of storage types are essentially recursive compositions of their contained storage types. The `Value` and the `Config` associated types will, in general, be constructed based on the `Value` and `Config` types of the contained storage types. Similarly, the implementations of the `internal_get_config()` and `init()` functions will recursively call those same methods of the contained storage types.

To get the feeling for these straightforward and essentially short and compact implementations of storage types, see the atomic and compound storage types implemented in [`sway-libs`](../files/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage/sway-libs/) and the user-defined [`StoragePair`](../files/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage/user-defined-libs/storage_pair.sw).

### Defining storage traits

[defining-storage-traits]: #defining-storage-traits

> The clear definition of the `Storage` trait allows defining storage traits. A storage trait is a trait that has `Storage` as a supertrait. The STD will come with (at least) two storage traits, `DeepReadStorage` and `DeepClearStorage` both defined in the [`storage.sw`](../files/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage/sway-libs/storage.sw).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The clear definition of the `Storage` trait allows defining storage traits. A storage trait is a trait that has `Storage` as a supertrait. The standard library will come with (at least) two storage traits, `DeepReadStorage` and `DeepClearStorage` both defined in the [`storage.sw`](../files/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage/sway-libs/storage.sw).
```

The implementations of storage traits will, similar to the implementations of `Storage`, be straightforward and based on recursive calls to the implementations of the same storage traits on the contained storage types.

To get the feeling for these straightforward and essentially short and compact implementations of storage traits, see the implementations of `DeepReadStorage` and `DeepClearStorage` for [`StorageVec`](../files/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage/sway-libs/storage/storage_vec.sw) and [`StoragePair`](../files/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage/user-defined-libs/storage_pair.sw).

By convention, all storage trait will have the suffix `Storage`.

## Internal API and the `__state` intrinsics

[internal-api-and-the-state-intrinsics]: #internal-api-and-the-state-intrinsics

> The STD will still provide the low-level storage `read`, `write`, and `clear` functions. However, unlike now when they are actually sometimes needed in contract code, e.g., to store arrays, in the new storage implementation there should never be a need to use them in contracts. Instead, the atomic `StorageBox` and `StorageEncodedBox` should be used. They provide the same low-level functionality while offering safe storage access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The standard library will still provide the low-level storage `read`, `write`, and `clear` functions. However, unlike now when they are actually sometimes needed in contract code, e.g., to store arrays, in the new storage implementation there should never be a need to use them in contracts. Instead, the atomic `StorageBox` and `StorageEncodedBox` should be used. They provide the same low-level functionality while offering safe storage access.
```

> The low-level API will be used only when implementing storage types, and even in those cases not always. Thus, the proposal is to move them to the module named [`internal`](../files/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage/sway-libs/storage/internal.sw) to emphasize that they are, similar to `Storage::internal_` functions, meant to be used only when developing custom storage types.

Reviewer: Direct programmatic manipulation of storage should not be encouraged but it should not be this discouraged either. There are cases where it's a better more straightforward pattern to use to implement what you want.

I do think having it in a separate module is fine, but I don't like the implication that it is "internal", it's merly raw or low level. But it's perfectly valid for the end user and not specific to storage type implementors.

Author: Agree!

Encouraging and/or discouraging usage is a separate topic, similar to the one of using raw pointers in contract code. It is to be reflected in the way how we convey and document the library/language features, patterns, etc. But in both cases, even discouraging the usage does not justify the name "internal".

The current module name is `storage_api` which we can keep. But, I am more for `raw_api` or some other classifier which will better convay that this is the low-level API, rarely needed, if at all, in the contract code.

@bitzoic Do you have a view or proposal here?

Similarly, the `__state_` intrinsics should be used only in the implementations of the internal API functions. In addition, the `__state_load_word` intrinsic should be changed to return the information if the requested slot was set or unset.

# Drawbacks

[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

> The only drawback I can think of is the time and effort needed to implement the proposal and to deal with the [breaking changes](#breaking-changes). However, the impact of _not_ improving the current storage handling will over time surely be higher. It would mean carrying on the issues mentioned in the [Motivation](#motivation) and, worst of all, living with an API that is error-prone by-design.

Reviewer: Maybe we should have some discussion of the performance implications of this change. Can storage get slower as a result of this, if employed correctly?

Author: I say - no :smile: (to the negative implications, not to the discussion :smile:)

Or at least I don't see any negative impact on the performance, compared to the approach we have now. On the contrary:
- Performance was in focus and considered carefully. It resulted, e.g, in the `StorageLayout` enum being introduced.
- Just using the `StorageLayout` information consistently will help `Storage` implementors to provide implementations that optimally pack and store data across the whole hierarchy of the stored data.
- Having the convention for "special behavior" methods should encourage providing optimized versions of methods where high-performance is needed and safety guaranteed by surrounding code.

But it can be that I am missing something, so yes we can surely discuss it further. And of course reviewing the proposal from the performance standpoint is highly encouraged.

# Rationale and alternatives

[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

> During the work on this RFC, five different approaches were intensely discussed and modeled in code. Non of them came even near to the simplicity of use and implementation of the proposed approach. Also, all of the discussed approaches could not guarantee an API that would prevent error-prone implementation of storage types, when it comes to the containment and composition semantics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the work on this RFC, five different approaches were intensely discussed and modeled in code. None of them came even near to the simplicity of use and implementation of the proposed approach. Also, all of the discussed approaches could not guarantee an API that would prevent error-prone implementation of storage types, when it comes to the containment and composition semantics.
```

For the storage API design guidelines, three different approaches were considered. We've tried to, e.g.:
- additionally distinguish between operations failing because of the storage being uninitialized and because of semantic errors like out of bound access. 
- avoid having possible multiple versions of a method by, e.g., putting the `Storage` instance in a "state" where it behaves differently for particular operations.

All three approaches ended up to be less intuitive to use and implement then the approach proposed in the [Storage API design guidelines](#storage-api-design-guidelines).

# Prior art

[prior-art]: #prior-art

> As the [`storage_keys` RFC](./0008-storage-handler.md) puts it, there is no much prior art that would correspond with the overall direction for storage handling that we took in Sway. This means, having the `storage` elements be distinguished and having the API that communicates that storage operations might fail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the [`storage_keys` RFC](./0008-storage-handler.md) puts it, there is not much prior art that would correspond with the overall direction for storage handling that we took in Sway. This means, having the `storage` elements be distinguished and having the API that communicates that storage operations might fail.
```

> The proposed approach builds on top of those two premisses, and brings robust and easy to implement composable storage types that can be arbitrarily configured in `storage` declarations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The proposed approach builds on top of those two premises, and brings robust and easy to implement composable storage types that can be arbitrarily configured in `storage` declarations.
```

# Unresolved questions

[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

Through the RFC process I expect the following open questions to be resolved:
- questions posed in the [sample code](../files/0013-configurable-and-composable-storage/) and marked with `TODO-DISCUSSION`.
- naming of proposed code elements like, e.g., method/function names, type names, etc. Since those names will become the part of the storage API it is of highest importance to come up with good and expressive names for abstractions.

Also, I expect the current storage attributes, `#[storage(read, write)]`, to be discussed. In the sample code, the existing attributes are used. However, there are two questions to be decided on:

> - if the meaning of `write` remains "read and write" as it is now, the attributes should be renamed to `readonly` and `readwrite`.

Reviewer: There are important reasons (for standards, notably) that we cannot be explicitly bound to read and write and must have read only/read write semantics.

Maybe we can just have the smallest change:
```sway
#[storage(read)]
#[storage(read_write)]
```
